Differential Gene Expression in Primary Ductal Breast Cancer and Angiosarcoma

By Alan Luo, Raehash Shah, Jarel Tey

Abstract:
Breast cancer remains one of the deadliest cancers in the world. There have been numerous efforts to lessen the impact of this cancer, and in this paper, we investigated how gene expression levels differ between angiosarcoma and primary ductal breast cancer, the least (LC) and most common (MC) cancers, respectively, in the hope that this information could be used in some way to help combat breast cancer. Specifically, we had four goals. First, we sought to determine how the type of breast cancer data impacted the differentially expressed (DE) gene levels in the LC and MC cancers. Second, we wanted to see how the type of sequencing algorithm impacted these DE levels. Third, we used the information from our exploration of the first two questions to determine the most highly expressed genes [with regards to normal breast tissue?] in the LC and MC cancers. Finally, we then performed pathway analyses on these two gene sets against a background of the human genome, to find a biological explanation for why these genes were found to be the most highly expressed in these cancers. We found that the type of data had somewhat of an impact, which led us to choose one of the two types of data investigated, count data, in our subsequent analyses. In contrast, we found that the type of sequencing algorithm had no effect, which led us to choose HTSEQ, as this also seemed to be the more reliable of the two algorithms as evidenced by its frequent usage in existing literature. Once we acquired the gene sets for the LC and MC genes using a package called DESeq, we acquired the pathways for the two cancers. We were able to find pathways for the MC genes, but not for the LC genes, as there was little to no information on the LC genes to acquire sufficiently significant enrichment analysis results. We conclude with a description of the next steps for our research.

